Remote Procedure Calls (#494)
vaadin/flow-and-components-documentation: documentation/element-api/client-server-rpc.asciidoc

layout: page
---

= Remote Procedure Calls

Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) are a way to execute procedures or subroutines in a different address space, typically on another machine.

Vaadin Flow handles server-client communication by allowing RPC calls from the server to the client, and _vice versa_. 

== Calling Client-side Methods from the Server

You can execute client-side methods from the server by accessing the `Element` API.

=== callFunction Method

> The `callFunction` method allows you to execute a client-side component function on the server side. The method accepts two parameters: the name of the function to call, and the arguments to pass to the function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `callFunction` method allows you to execute a client-side component function from the server side. The method accepts two parameters: the name of the function to call, and the arguments to pass to the function. 
```

The element api is "proxy" to the client side, so we are really executing the method call only in the client side, just initiating the call from the server side code.

*Example*: Using the `executeJavaScript` method.

[source, java]
----
public void complete() {
    getElement().executeJavaScript("$0.complete()", this);
}
----

It is also possible to call the `executeJavaScript` method to access methods and fields of a Web Component.

== Calling Server-side Methods from the Client

You can call a server-side method from the client side using either the `@EventHandler` or `@ClientCallable` annotation.

=== @EventHandler Annotation

The `@EventHandler` annotation allows you to register a server-side method as an event handler. It publishes the annotated method and allows it to be invoked from the client side as a template event handler. See <<../polymer-templates/tutorial-template-event-handlers#,Handling User Events in a PolymerTemplate>> for more.

=== @ClientCallable annotation

The `@ClientCallable` annotation allows you to invoke a server-side method from the client side. It marks a template method as a method that can be called from the client side using the `this.$server.serverMethodName(args)` notation.

> You can use it anywhere in your client-side Polymer class implementation, and can pass your own arguments in the method. Note that the types should match the method declaration on the server side. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call the method from your client-side code and can pass arguments to the method. Note that the types should match the method declaration on the server side. 
```

Let's remove the Polymer specific part because this is usable in other ways too. I'll create an issue for missing documentation that has been promised a long time ago, but let's not fix that today.

*Example*: Using `this.$server.clickHandler()` to mark a template method.

[source, xml]
----
this.$server.clickHandler()
----

> // Can we insert an example that shows how to use the annotation?

Reviewer: That would be 
```suggestion
[source, java]
----
    @ClientCallable
    public void clickHandler() {
        // do your server side action here
    }
----
```

The build probably now fails, I'll need to add that example to the code side too.
